---
title: Case study -  MEPS health expenditure
key: 9f660c963794c20e534c811dcee7577e

---
## Case study - MEPS health expenditures

```yaml
type: TitleSlide
key: dd11c5f79c
```





`@lower_third`
name: Frees
title: Instructor




---
## Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS)

```yaml
type: FullSlide
key: 2192860644
```

`@part1`
- Data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS), conducted by the U.S. Agency of Health Research and Quality (AHRQ).
- A probability survey that provides nationally representative estimates of health care use, expenditures, sources of payment, and insurance coverage for the U.S. civilian population.
- We consider data from the first panel of 2003 and take a random sample of *n* = 2,000 individuals between ages 18 and 65.
- You can learn more about MEPS at http://www.meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/








---
## MEPS health expenditures

```yaml
type: FullSlide
key: a8a928a5b2
```

`@part1`
- MEPS collects detailed information on individuals of each medical care episode by type of services including:
    - physician office visits,
    - hospital emergency room visits,
    - hospital outpatient visits,
    - hospital inpatient stays,
    - all other medical provider visits, and
    - use of prescribed medicines.
- This detailed information allows one to develop models of health care utilization to predict future expenditures.








---
## Outcome variable

```yaml
type: FullSlide
key: 42dd6bc742
```

`@part1`
Our dependent variable is expenditures for **outpatient** admissions.

- **Inpatient** admissions include persons who were admitted to a hospital and stayed overnight.
- **Outpatient** events include hospital outpatient department, office-based provider  and emergency room visits excluding dental services.
    - Includes hospital stays with the same date of admission and discharge
    - Payments associated with emergency room visits that immediately preceded an inpatient stay were included in the inpatient expenditures.
    - Prescribed medicines that can be linked to hospital admissions were included in inpatient expenditures, not in outpatient utilization.








---
## Explanatory variables

```yaml
type: FullSlide
key: db790be93a
```

`@part1`
Thousands of variables in the database. Here 13 most relevant.

$$
{\small \begin{array}{l|l}
expendop    & \text{Amounts of expenditures for outpatient visits} \\\\
gender      & \text{Indicate gender of patient (=1 if female, =0 if male)} \\\\
age         & \text{Age in years between 18 and 65 }\\\\
race        & \text{Race of patient described as Asian, Black, Native, White and other} \\\\
region      & \text{Region of patient described as WEST, NORTHEAST, MIDWEST and SOUTH} \\\\
educ        & \text{Level of education received described by words (LHIGHSC, HIGHSCH and COLLEGE)} \\\\
phstat      & \text{Self-rated physical health status described as EXCE, VGOO, GOOD, FAIR and POOR} \\\\
mpoor       & \text{Self-rated mental health (=1 if poor or fair, =0 if good to excellent mental health)} \\\\
anylimit    & \text{Any activity limitation (=1 if any functional/activity limitation, =0 if otherwise)} \\\\
income      & \text{Income compared to poverty line described as POOR, NPOOR, LINCOME, MINCOME and HINCOME} \\\\
insure      & \text{Insurance coverage (=1 if covered by public/private health insurance in any month of 1996, =0 otherwise)} \\\\
usc         & \text{1 if dissatisfied with one's usual source of care} \\\\
unemploy    & \text{Employment status of patients} \\\\
managedcare & \text{1 if enrolled in an HMO or gatekeeper plan} \\\\
\end{array}}
$$








---
## Case study outline

```yaml
type: FullSlide
key: 361621e681
```

`@part1`
The following series of exercises leads you through an analysis of the steps for understanding a complex data set. Because of the complexity of the data, in each step only a sample of procedures will be executed.

The outline consists of:

- Summary statistics
- Splitting the data into training and testing portions with initial model fits
- Selecting variables to be included in the model






`@script`




---
## Let's Practice

```yaml
type: FinalSlide
key: 520d28a6c2
```








