---
title: Residual analysis
key: 1a22b8308fcc14590ae2bdb95030c2a2

---
## Residual analysis

```yaml
type: TitleSlide
key: 198d6bf8d9
```





`@lower_third`
name: Frees
title: Instructor




---
## Residual analysis

```yaml
type: FullSlide
key: 68ffe37b59
```

`@part1`
- Use $e_i = y_i - \hat{y}_i$ as the *i*th residual.
- Later, I will discuss rescaling by, for example, $s$, to get a standardized residual.
- *Role of residuals*: If the model formulation is correct, then residuals should be approximately equal to random errors or "white noise."
- *Method of attack*: Look for patterns in the residuals. Use this information to improve the model specification.





`@script`




---
## Using residuals to select explanatory variables

```yaml
type: FullSlide
key: 383f89939a
```

`@part1`
- Residual analysis can help identify additional explanatory variables that may be used to improve the formulation of the model.
- If the model is correct, then residuals should resemble random errors and contain no discernible patterns.
- Thus, when comparing residuals to explanatory variables, we do not expect any relationships.
- If we do detect a relationship, then this suggests the need to control for this additional variable.





`@script`




---
## Detecting relationships between residuals and explanatory variables

```yaml
type: FullSlide
key: 59d8698681
```

`@part1`
.

- Calculate summary statistics and display the distribution of  residuals to identify outliers.
- Calculate the correlation between the residuals and additional explanatory variables to search for linear relationships.
- Create scatter plots between the residuals and additional explanatory variables to search for nonlinear relationships.





`@script`




---
## Let's Practice!

```yaml
type: FinalSlide
key: 30b3b25008
```






`@script`



